Refactor declaring repositories into core page and cheat sheet (#22943)
gradle/gradle: subprojects/docs/src/docs/userguide/dep-man/01-core-dependency-management/repositories_cheat_sheet.adoc

[[repositories-cheat-sheet]]
= Repositories Cheat Sheet

[TIP]
====

> Just getting started with repositories?

Author: Same as above.

Check out the <<declaring_repositories.adoc#declaring-repositories, Declaring Repositories>> to learn the basics of repositories.
====

[[sec:handling_credentials]]
== Credentials

Never store credentials in plain text in your build script.
Instead, store the credentials in a local `gradle.properties` file and use the link:https://plugins.gradle.org/plugin/nu.studer.credentials[credentials plugin] to encrypt and consume credentials.

> You can use link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/artifacts/repositories/AuthenticationSupported.html#credentials-java.lang.Class-[AuthenticationSupported.credentials]

Reviewer: nitpick:
```suggestion
You can use the link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/artifacts/repositories/AuthenticationSupported.html#credentials-java.lang.Class-[AuthenticationSupported.credentials]
```

Author: Most documentation omits articles when referring to methods; I'm comfortable leaving this the way it is.

to limit the credentials used to access a repository to only the relevant credential types.
Gradle looks up credentials from your <<build_environment.adoc#sec:gradle_configuration_properties,Gradle Properties>> when a build requires them.

> Gradle supports lookup of the following credential types:

Reviewer: nitpick:
```suggestion
Gradle supports lookup for the following credential types:
```

Author: I can go either way on this. Neither is explicitly wrong, to my knowledge. Let me know if you feel especially strongly.

| <<#sec:gcs-repositories,Documentation>>
|===

[IMPORTANT]
====
Never check plain text usernames or passwords into version control as part of your build file.
For more information about properly storing credentials, see <<sec:handling_credentials, Credentials>>.
====

The transport protocol is part of the URL that defines a repository.
The following build script demonstrates how to create HTTP-based Maven and Ivy repositories:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/defineRepository/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=maven-ivy-repository-no-auth]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/defineRepository/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=maven-ivy-repository-no-auth]"]
====

The following example shows how to declare SFTP repositories:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/defineRepository/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=maven-ivy-repository-auth]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/defineRepository/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=maven-ivy-repository-auth]"]
====

For details on HTTP related authentication, see <<#sec:authentication_schemes, Authentication Schemes>>.

> When using an AWS S3 backed repository you need to authenticate using link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.credentials.AwsCredentials.html[AwsCredentials], providing access-key and a private-key. The following example shows how to declare a S3 backed repository and providing AWS credentials:

Reviewer: nitpick:
```suggestion
When using an AWS S3-backed repository, you need to authenticate using the link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.credentials.AwsCredentials.html[AwsCredentials], providing an access-key and a private-key. The following example shows how to declare a S3 backed repository and provide AWS credentials:
```

Author: ```suggestion
When using an AWS S3-backed repository, you need to authenticate using link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.credentials.AwsCredentials.html[AwsCredentials], via an access-key and a private-key.
The following example shows how to declare a S3 backed repository and provide AWS credentials:
```

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/defineRepository/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=maven-ivy-s3-repository]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/defineRepository/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=maven-ivy-s3-repository]"]
====

> You can also delegate all credentials to the AWS sdk with `AwsImAuthentication`:

Reviewer: nitpick: Should sdk be capitalized? 
```suggestion
You can also delegate all credentials to the AWS SDK with `AwsImAuthentication`:
```

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/defineRepository/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=maven-ivy-s3-repository-with-iam]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/defineRepository/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=maven-ivy-s3-repository-with-iam]"]
====

> For details on AWS S3 related authentication, see the section <<#sec:s3-repositories>>.

Reviewer: nitpick: just to match above
```suggestion
For details on AWS S3-related authentication, see the section <<#sec:s3-repositories>>.
```

Author: ```suggestion
For details about authenticating with AWS S3, see <<#sec:s3-repositories,Declare an AWS S3 Repository>>.
```

Google Cloud Storage repositories use default application credentials with no further configuration required:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/defineRepository/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=maven-ivy-gcs-repository]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/defineRepository/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=maven-ivy-gcs-repository]"]
====

> For details on Google GCS related authentication, see the section <<#sec:gcs-repositories>>.

Author: ```suggestion
For details about authenticating with GCS, see <<#sec:gcs-repositories,Declare a GCS Repository>>.
```

[[sec:supported_metadata_sources]]
== Supported Metadata Sources

Gradle supports the following metadata sources:

[%header%autowidth,compact]
|===
| Metadata source | Description | Order | Maven | Ivy / flat dir

| `gradleMetadata()`
| Look for Gradle `.module` files
| 1st
| yes
| yes

| `mavenPom()`
| Look for Maven `.pom` files
| 2nd
| yes
| yes

| `ivyDescriptor()`
| Look for `ivy.xml` files
| 2nd
| no
| yes

| `artifact()`
| Look directly for artifact
| 3rd
| yes
| yes
|===

When searching for a module in a repository, Gradle checks for <<declaring_dependencies.adoc#sec:supported-metadata-formats,supported metadata file formats>>.

* In a Maven repository, Gradle looks for a `.pom` file.
* In an Ivy repository, Gradle looks for an `ivy.xml` file.
* In a directory repository, Gradle looks directly for `.jar` files (since directory repositories do not contain metadata).

Gradle also looks for Gradle Module Metadata (GMM) files (`.module`) in Maven and Ivy repositories.

> When you define a custom repository, you might want to configure this behavior.

Reviewer: suggestion: less words and firmer
```suggestion
When you define a custom repository, you might want to configure this behavior.
```

For example, you can define a Maven repository that only uses `.jar` files, without `.pom` files.
Use _metadata sources_ to configure metadata formats in a repository:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/defineRepository/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=maven-repo-with-metadata-sources]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/defineRepository/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=maven-repo-with-metadata-sources]"]
====

You can specify multiple metadata sources. Gradle searches metadata sources in the declared order.

> When parsing a metadata file, Gradle looks for a marker indicating that a matching Gradle Module Metadata files exists.

Reviewer: question: not sure why this went plural
```suggestion
When parsing a metadata file, Gradle looks for a marker indicating that a matching Gradle Module Metadata file exists.
```

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/defineRepository/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=digest-authentication]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/defineRepository/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=digest-authentication]"]
====

[[sub:preemptive_authentication]]
=== Use Preemptive Authentication to Always Send Credentials

By default, Gradle only submits credentials when a server responds with an authentication challenge in the form of an HTTP 401 response.
In some cases, the server responds with a different code (e.g. GitHub repositories return a 404).
To prevent this behavior from failing authentication, you can send credentials to the server preemptively.
To enable preemptive authentication, use the link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/authentication/http/BasicAuthentication.html[BasicAuthentication] scheme:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/defineRepository/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=preemptive-authentication]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/defineRepository/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=preemptive-authentication]"]
====

[[sub:http-header-auth]]
=== Use HTTP(S) Header Authentication

> You can specify any HTTP(S) header for secured Maven repositories requiring token, OAuth2 or other HTTP header-based authentication.

Reviewer: nitpick:
```suggestion
You can specify any HTTP(S) header for secured Maven repositories requiring token, OAuth2, or other HTTP header-based authentication.
```

To use HTTP(S) header authentication, specify credentials with link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/credentials/HttpHeaderCredentials.html[HttpHeaderCredentials] and use the link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/authentication/http/HttpHeaderAuthentication.html[HttpHeaderAuthentication] scheme:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/defineRepository/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=header-authenticated-maven-repo]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/defineRepository/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=header-authenticated-maven-repo]"]
====

[[sec:s3-repositories]]
== Declare an AWS S3 Repository

You can use the following system properties to configure interactions with s3 repositories:

`org.gradle.s3.endpoint`::

> Used to override the AWS S3 endpoint when using a non AWS, S3 API compatible, storage service.

Reviewer: nitpick:
```suggestion
Used to override the AWS S3 endpoint when using a non-AWS, S3 API-compatible storage service.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Used to override the AWS S3 endpoint when using an S3 API-compatible storage service that is _not_ AWS.
```

`org.gradle.s3.maxErrorRetry`::

> Specifies the maximum number of times to retry a request in the event that the S3 server responds with a HTTP 5xx status code. When not specified a default value of 3 is used.

Reviewer: nitpick:
```suggestion
Specifies the maximum number of times to retry a request in the event that the S3 server responds with a HTTP 5xx status code. When not specified, a default value of 3 is used.
```

----
s3://<bucketName>[.<regionSpecificEndpoint>]/<s3Key>
----

e.g. `s3://myBucket.s3.eu-central-1.amazonaws.com/maven/release`

* `myBucket` is the AWS S3 bucket name.
* `s3.eu-central-1.amazonaws.com` is the _optional_ http://docs.aws.amazon.com/general/latest/gr/rande.html#s3_region[region specific endpoint].
* `/maven/release` is the AWS S3 key (unique identifier for an object within a bucket)

[[sub:s3_proxy_settings]]
=== S3 proxy settings

A proxy for S3 can be configured using the following system properties:

* `https.proxyHost`
* `https.proxyPort`
* `https.proxyUser`
* `https.proxyPassword`
* `http.nonProxyHosts` (NOTE: this is not a typo.)

If the `org.gradle.s3.endpoint` property has been specified with a HTTP (not HTTPS) URI the following system proxy settings can be used:

* `http.proxyHost`
* `http.proxyPort`
* `http.proxyUser`
* `http.proxyPassword`
* `http.nonProxyHosts`

[[sub:s3_v4_signatures]]
=== AWS S3 V4 Signatures (AWS4-HMAC-SHA256)

Some of the AWS S3 regions (eu-central-1 - Frankfurt) require signing all HTTP requests in accordance with AWS's http://docs.aws.amazon.com/general/latest/gr/signature-version-4.html[signature version 4].

> Always specify S3 URL's containing the region specific endpoint when using buckets that require V4 signatures:

Reviewer: nitpick:
```suggestion
Always specify S3 URL's containing the region-specific endpoint when using buckets that require V4 signatures:
```

----
s3://somebucket.s3.eu-central-1.amazonaws.com/maven/release
----

When a region-specific endpoint is _not_ specified for buckets requiring V4 Signatures, Gradle uses the default AWS region (us-east-1) and the
following warning appears on the console:

----
Attempting to re-send the request to .... with AWS V4 authentication.

> To avoid this warning in the future, use region-specific endpoint to

Reviewer: Thought: Is this the actual console message? it is missing an article or a plural?
```suggestion
To avoid this warning in the future, use a region-specific endpoint to
```
```suggestion
To avoid this warning in the future, use region-specific endpoints to
```

Author: I couldn't find the actual message in our source code, so I left it as-is.

access buckets located in regions that require V4 signing.
----

Failure to specify the region-specific endpoint for buckets requiring V4 signatures means:

* 3 round-trips to AWS for every file upload and download.
* Increased network latencies and slower builds.
* Increased likelihood of transmission failures.

Always specify a region-specific endpoint.

[[sub:s3_cross_account]]
==== AWS S3 Cross Account Access

> Some organizations may have multiple AWS accounts, e.g. one for each team.

Reviewer: question: Now, American English spelling of organizations. I like this one more.

Author: This API doesn't use the British spelling, so I stuck with the (default) American spelling in prose.

The AWS account of the bucket owner is often different from the artifact publisher and consumers.

> The bucket owner must grant consumers access, otherwise artifacts are only usable from the publisher's account.

Reviewer: nitpick:
```suggestion
The bucket owner must grant consumers access; otherwise, artifacts are only usable from the publisher's account.
```

Author: I tend to avoid semicolons unless absolutely necessary in documentation. I think this is straightforward enough with the comma.

To grant consumers access, add the `bucket-owner-full-control` link:https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/dev/acl-overview.html#canned-acl[Canned ACL] to the uploaded objects.
Gradle will do this in every upload.
Make sure the publisher has the required IAM permissions either directly or via an assumed IAM Role:

* `PutObjectAcl`
* `PutObjectVersionAcl` if bucket versioning is enabled

> For more informration, see link:https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/dev/s3-access-control.html[AWS S3 Access Permissions].

Reviewer: typo + nitpick:
```suggestion
For more information, see the link:https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/dev/s3-access-control.html[AWS S3 Access Permissions].
```

[[sec:gcs-repositories]]
== Declare a Google Cloud Storage Repository

Use the following system properties to configure link:https://cloud.google.com/storage/[Google Cloud Storage] (GCS) repositories:

`org.gradle.gcs.endpoint`::

> Used to override the GCS endpoint when using a non-Google Cloud Platform (GCP), GCS API compatible, storage service.

Reviewer: nitpick: for consistency with above
```suggestion
Used to override the GCS endpoint when using a non-Google Cloud Platform (GCP), GCS API-compatible storage service.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Used to override the GCS endpoint when using a GCS-compatible storage service that is _not_ GCP.
```

`org.gradle.gcs.servicePath`::

> Used to override the GCS root service path which the Google Cloud Storage client builds requests from, defaults to `/`.

Reviewer: nitpick:
```suggestion
Used to override the GCS root service path, which the Google Cloud Storage client builds requests from, defaults to `/`.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Used to override the GCS root service path which the Google Cloud Storage client builds requests from. Defaults to `/`.
```
This sentence is still a bit rambly. Breaking it up into two instead.

* If no `settings.xml` is available, Gradle uses the default location `__USER_HOME__/.m2/repository`.

[[sec:case-for-maven-local]]
=== Local Maven Repository Drawbacks

Usually, you should not add a local Maven repository as a repository.
Local Maven repositories impose the following drawbacks on your build:

* The local Maven repository can contain partial dependencies, since Maven uses it as a cache. For example, if Maven never downloaded the source or javadoc files for a given module, Gradle will not find them either since it <<dependency_resolution.adoc#sec:how-gradle-downloads-deps,searches for files in a single repository>> once a module has been found. _This can prevent Gradle from building successfully._
* Artifact origins cannot be tracked (a correctness and security problem).
* Artifacts can be overwritten, _so Gradle does not perform any caching_.

In some cases, you might have to use a local Maven repository:

* Maven interoperability. For example, project A is built with Maven, project B is built with Gradle, and you need to share the artifacts during development.

> * Interoperability with Gradle itself. For example, you want to check that changes to project A work with project B. Usually you should use a <<composite_builds.adoc#composite_builds, composite build>> for this use case, but in some situations that isn't possible.

Reviewer: nitpick:
```suggestion
* Interoperability with Gradle itself. For example, you want to check that changes to project A work with project B. Usually, you should use a <<composite_builds.adoc#composite_builds, composite build>> for this use case, but in some situations, that isn't possible.
```

Author: These commas aren't needed.

> If you do use a local Maven repository, combine it with <<declaring_repositories.adoc#sec:repository-content-filtering,a repository filter>> to ensure it only provides specific dependencies.

Reviewer: nitpick: perhaps need another word, if you are forced to use, need to use, have to use, required to use... or just use
```suggestion
If you use a local Maven repository, combine it with <<declaring_repositories.adoc#sec:repository-content-filtering,a repository filter>> to ensure it only provides specific dependencies.
```

Author: In this case "do" is performing some heavy lifting -- it's emphasizing that this is a rare edge case that we don't recommend, but if you exist in a niche where you have no choice, you ought to do this. I'll add emphasis to make this clearer.

Author: ```suggestion
If you _do_ use a local Maven repository, combine it with <<declaring_repositories.adoc#sec:repository-content-filtering,a repository filter>> to ensure it only provides specific dependencies.
```
